Chapter 1 -- Electrostatics

1. What is the law of conservation of charge? What is the SI unit of charge?

2. What is the difference between electrical conductors and insulators, and how are they attracted to charged objects? What is this process called?

Ans: -A electrical conductor is an object with free electrons. Free electrons are pulled towards a charged object.
     -A electrical insulator is an object in which all electrons are tightly bounded to the nuclei. ELectrons WITHIN EACH MOLECULE are pulled towards the obejct.
     -Electrostatic induction

3a) Explain why a plastic rod becomes negatively charged after it is rubbed by the cloth.
 Ans: Some electrons are transferred from the cloth to the palstic bag.

3b*) Describe and explain the net electrostatic direction of the net electrostatic force acting on paper bits by the plastic rod. [COMMON]
 Ans: On the can, positive charges are induced at the end near the bag and negative charges at the end far from the bag.
      The attraction on the near end is greater than the repulsion on the far end. Therefore, the net electrostatic force acts towards the bag.

3c) If the rubbed plastic rod is replaced by a rubbed metal rod, are there any changes to the result? 
 Ans: The metal rod will not attract paper bits, because it is discharged by earthing through the hand. 
      (Whenever the rod is charged, the charges are immediately shared with the Earth via the human body)

4. What is charging and discharging? Name some examples of charging and discharging. For these examples, are they applicable to conductors, insulators, or both?

Ans: -Charging: neutral object becomes electrically charged; Discharging: electrically charged object becomes neutral
     -Charging by friction: applies to insulators and insulated conductors
     -Charging by sharing: applies only to conductors
     -Discharging by earthing: applies only to conductors
     -Charging by induction: applies only to conductors

5. Refer to a flying aluminium foil experiment (p.12).
 a) Explain why the metal tray becomes charged after it is touched momentarily in step 3. (Ans: charging by induction and earthing)
 b) Explain why the foil 'flies' in the air after it is released and touches the tray in step 4. (Ans: share like charges -> repulsion)

6a) What is a gold leaf electroscope. (Ans: An instrument to test the presence of electric charges.)
6b) What is a Van de Graaff generator? [EXTRA] (Ans: A Van de Graaff generator pulls electrons from the Earth, moves them along a belt and stores them on the large sphere.)

7. A girl stands on a plastic stool and puts her hands on a metal dome. After a large amount of charges are transferred to the dome, the girl's hair stands on end. Explain.

Ans: The girl's hair carry the same kind of charges and repel each other.

8. State the Coulomb's Law. 

9. What is electric field strength. (Ans: It is defined as the electric force F per unit charge on q)

10. Calculate a) resultant field strength b) neutral point (distance) (Ans: splitting forces, vector sum)

11. What is special about the electric field between parallel charged plates?

Ans: The E-field has the same strength everywhere between the plates and points towards the negative plate pependicularly.

12. Derive an equation describing the relationship between electrical potential energy and work done/KE. (Ans: QV = 1/2 mv^2)

13. Describe the electric field patterns a) around an isolated point charge b) between 2 parallel charged paltes c) around 2 point charges

14. A small conducting ball is placed midway between 2 parallel metal plates conducted to an E.H.T. via an ammeter. [2011 AL q7]
 a) State how to make the ball acquire +ve charges. (Ans: Let the ball touch the left plate to share some +ve charges.)
 b*) After the ball acquires +ve charges, explain why it can shuttle continuously between the two plates.
    Ans: -When the ball acquires +ve charges, it repels away from the +ve charged left plate and is attracted to the right plate
         -When the ball touches the right plate, it acquires -ve charges from it. The process repeats.
 c**) State and explain how the average current registered by the ammeter is affected if the separation of the two metal plates is decreased.
    Ans: -As the separation decreases, electric field between the plates increase (by E = V/d)
         -Electric force on the ball increases
         -Acceleration on the ball increases, and so average current increases

15. Suggest a simple method to test whether the electric field between the plates is uniform. [DSE Practice Paper q8c]

Ans: -Fix the plates separation and the output of the EHT supply
     -Move the polystyrene tile so that the ball is placed in different positions in the space between the plates
     -The angle should remain the same if the electric field between the plates is uniform
     (same angle = same magnitude of electric force = uniform electric field)

16. Illustrate how the size of metal spheres affect the quantities of charge shared by them after they touch each other, using suitable apparatus. [6 marks]

Ans: -Touch the metal plate of the gold leaf electroscope for a short moment so that it is earthed
     -Bring the two spheres in contact momentarily without earthing them.
     -Bring one of the spheres in contact with the electroscope. Record the degree of deflection of the gold leaf
     -Earth the gold leaf electroscope again
     -Bring the other sphere in contact with the electroscope and record the degree of deflection of the gold leaf
     -The large sphere would cause the gold leaf to deflect at a larger angle. This shows that the large sphere acquires more charge.

17. (p.49 q23d)

Ans: -By symmetry, the resultant E field at Z points upwards. Opposite charges are induced on the top and bottom end of the sphere
     -The net electrostatic force acting on the sphere points downwards. When the sphere is released, it accelerates downwards from rest
     -After passing through line joining Q and Y, the electrostatic force acting on it becomes upwards
     -Therefore, it oscillates about the line joining Q and y

18. Why is the cell wall torn when a very strong electric field is applied on the potato? (p.50 q24b)

Ans: -When a strong electric field is applied on the potato, opposite charges are induced in the two sides of each cell in the potato
     -The top side experiences an upward electric force and the bottom side experiences a downward electric force
     -The cell is torn apart vertically if the forces are strong enough

Other tips/misconceptions/common mistakes:
1. Always point out which method of charging is involved in short questions (e.g. sharing, induction).
2. For attraction problems between neutral and charged objects, always consider what will happen after the 2 objects touch each other 
   (e.g. attraction -> sharing -> repulsion)
3. The direction at a certain point in an E-field is the same as the electric force acting on a positive charge +q placed at that point.
   Similarly, the direction F is opposite to that of E if a negative charge -q is placed in the field.
   
Chapter 2 -- Current, Voltage and Resistance

1. Book p.107 q30a: Why does the sliding contact have to be moved quickly?

Ans: -When the I through the bulb increases, temp. of the filament increases
     -Moving the sliding contact quickly can reduce temp. change

2. A student claims that since the R of light bulb is not a constant, the equation R = V/I cannot be used to calculate the R of the bulb. Explain why this is wrong.

Ans: R = V/I is the definition of resistance. It is applicable to all conductors.

3. Describe, with the aid of a circuit diagram, a method to find how the R of a metal wire of uniform thickness varies with its length l.

Ans: -<circuit with ammeter and wire in series, sliding contact and R in parallel>
     -Use the sliding contact C to vary the length l on which V is measured
     -Record respectively the voltmeter reading V and ammeter reading I. The resistance R is given by R = V/If
     -Plot a graph of R against l. A straight line passing through the origin is obtained.

4a) What is an electric current?
4b) What is a galvanometer/current sensor used for? (Ans: for detecting size and direction of current)
4c) What is e.m.f.? (Ans: E imparted by a source per unit charge passing through)
4d) What is p.d.? (Ans: Electric PE converted to other forms per unit charge passing between 2 pts in the external circuit)
4e) What is voltage? (Ans: Change in electric PE per unit charge)
4f) What does the Ohm's law state?

5. Estimate the typical values of voltage (e.g. lightning, MTR train, solar cell)

6. Suggest a reason why Ohm's law is not obeyed outside a certain range in a V-I graph.

Ans: As V passes through the lamp, the temp. of the lamp increaes and the R of the lamp increases.

7. Suggest how to measure the temperature of a metallic coil to detect its change of temp. due to current.

Ans: Immerse the coil into the water in a water bath. Meausre temp. of water with a thermometer.

Points to note:
1. A source does not provide charges to the circuit. It only supplies energy to charges passing through the battery.
2. Ohm's law is true provided that temp. and other physical conditions are unchanged.
3. Conductors that obey Ohm's law are called ohmic conductors. R of an ~ remains the same when different p.d. is applied across it.
4. Conductors that don't obey Ohm's law are called non-ohmic conductors. R of ~ vary under different p.d. (changing slope of V-I graph)

Chapter 3 -- Circuits in Practice

1. Explain why the voltmeter reading is smaller than the theoretical value. State how a more accurate result can be obtained.

Ans: -When the voltmeter is conected in parallel with the resistor, their Req becomes lower than ~
     -Therefore, the voltage across the resistor becomes lower
     -Use a voltmeter of higher resistance
     (Req reduced = V measured across ~ reduced)

2. Book p.138 q16b: Which circuit gives a more accurate estimation of R? Explain. (setups to measure resistor of low/high resistance)

Ans: -Circuit 2 (circuit to measure resistor of high R)
     -Resistance of voltmeter is comparable with that of resistor. A significant part of current measured in circuit 1 goes through the voltmeter
     -Resistance of ammeter is much smaller than that of resistor
     -Only a small part of voltage measured in circuit 2 in contributed by the voltage across ammeter

3. Explain why a camera may not work properly at a low temperature, when the internal resistance of the battery is high.

Ans: At low temp., terminal voltage across the battery is lower than normal and may not be able to supply the operating voltage for the ~

4. Resistors of very high resistance are used in the circuit of a high voltage prob (measures voltage up to 40kV). Explain.

Ans: This reduces the I through the circuit and hence reduces the risk of an electric shock

5. With the aid of a circuit diagram, describe the procedure of an experiemnt to study how the terminal voltage V delivered by the battery depends on the 
   resistance R connected to it. State one precaution of the experiment. [DSE 2019 1B q7a]

Ans: -Close the switch and record corresponding V and r
     -Adjust the resistance R to other values to repeat the experiment
     -Precuations: set the variable resistor to its max initially/ open the switch after each measurement

Points to note:
1. Resistance of voltmeter should be much higher than that of the component it measures.  
2. Resistors can protect some circuit components (e.g. ammeter) from being damaged by large I.
3. For questions involving potential dividiers, consider calculating the voltage obtained when the sliding is at mid-pt or at two ends (may be able to find max I).

Chapter 4 -- Domestic Electricity

1. Estimate the typical rated power of the common electrical appliances.

2. State 2 advantages of connecting sockets in parallel. (ans: can work at mains voltage, on/off independently)

3. State advantages of the ring circuit arrangement.

Ans: -Current is divded into two halves via two paths, thus thinner cables can be used
     -If the ring circuit is broken at one point, it can still function
     -Since current is divded into two halves, the chance of overloading is reduced

4. State advantages of branch circuits with reference to circuit breakers.

5. Should a fuse be installed in the neutral wire? (Ans: The appliance would still be live even after the fuse has blown. It is dangerous.)

6. Referring to a cell phone charger with a plastic case and a plastic earth pin: 
  a) Why is the 'fake' earth pin needed? b) Explain why it is safe to use the charger even without an earth wire.

Ans: a) An earth pin is needed to open the shutters covering the live and the neutral holes on a socket.
     b) The charger has an insulating plastic case. No current will flow through the case.

7. Should an air conditioner be connected to the ring main? Why? 

Ans: No, it draws a larger I. It should be connected in a separated circuit parallel to the ring main to avoid overloading.

8. State the advantage of keeping the voltage of the neutral wire at 0V. 

Ans: To ensure that the appliace is at 0 potential when switched off/ To prevent electric charge from accumulating in the appliance.

9. What is an alternating current? What is the difference between a.c. and d.c.?

10. Book p.180 q17d: State an assumption you made an explain how this assumption affects your answer in c).

Ans: Assume no heat loss to surroundings. The heat loss becomes more significant as temp. of the fuse wire increases. 
     The actual time taken for the fuse wire to melt is longer than 6.33s.

11. Book p.180 q18ciii): Jimmy says that the circuit breaker will certainly be triggered beceause the total I drawn by the sockets >30A. Comment.

Ans: Incorrect. The actual current drawn from each socket is < 13A. The circuit breaker will not be trigger as long as the total current < 30A.

12. State a function of the earth wire. (Ans: ~ keeps the potential of the metal body of appliance at 0V to prevent an electric shock in case of a fault.)

13. State the function of the earth terminal in the socket. (Ans: It prevents electric shock if there is a leakage of electricity to the metal case.)

14. Give a reason why switches should be connected to the live wire instead of to the neutral wire.

Ans: To ensure that the appliances are cut off from live/high voltage when the switch is open, so that no electric shock occurs when the appliance is touched.

15. The household voltage supply in HK has changed from 200V a.c. to 220V a.c. in 1995. Suggest 2 reasons for the change.

Ans: To increase power output; to match with the international standard

16. Explain why it is safer to have the earth pin longer than the other two pins.

Ans: 1. To ensure that the metal case of the heating element is earthed before the heating elemen is connected to the live wire.
     2. The long pin opens the shutter that blocks the other 2 apertures to prevent accidental insertion of metal objects.

17. Explain why the resistance of a light bulb working at its rated value is much greater than when it is working at a lower rated voltage/power.

Ans: When the bulb is working at its rated value, its temperature is much higher, so its resistance increases.

18. Explain why thick wires are used to connect the water heater to the mains supply.

Ans: Thick wires have smaller resistance, which reduces the heating effect of current on the wires.

19. Ch4 Test q1diii): Which wire could prevent an electric shock of a person touched the case of the heater? Explain.

Ans: Wire C (earth wire). Its resistance is very low and current would be conducted from the case through this wire to the Earth.
