Chapter 5 -- Wave Phenomena and Stationary Waves

1. What is the mathematical relationship between, wave speed, wavelength, frequency, refractive index and the ratio of sin(i)/sin(r)?

2. When waves approach the shore, why do the wavefronts become parallel to the shoreline?

Ans: Water is shallower near the shore. As a wave approach the shore, it undergoes refraction and bends gradually until it travels along the normal to the shoreline.

3. What is refraction, diffration, principle of superposition and interference?

Ans: Refraction is the change in travelling direction of a wave due to a change in wave speed.
     Diffraction is the bending or spreading of waves around the edge into the 'shadow' of an obstacle.
     The principle of superposition states that when two or more waves overlap, the displacement of any point on the resultant wave is the sum of the displacements
     due to all waves at that point.
     Interference occurs when two waves overlap.

4. What are the conditions needed to form a stable interference pattern?

Ans: Same frequency, constant phase difference (coherent sources)

5. What is a) constructive interference and b) destructive interference?

Ans: a) It occurs at positions where the two waves arrive in phase
     b) It occurs at position where the two waves arrive in antiphase

6. How can the nodal and antinodal lines be spread more widely? 

Ans: Increasing wavelength of waves, decreasing separation between sources

7. Find the total number of antinodal lines. 

Ans: Find distance between S1 and S2, see how many whole number (n) of wavelengths can fit in this distance. Final result is n*2 + 1 lines.
     Path difference < S1S2 = xλ [1], Total no. of antinodal lines = <ans> [1]

8. State the differences between travelling wave and stationary wave. (propagation, wavelength, amplitude, frequency, particle motion, phase, energy).

9*. State the conditions for a stationary wave to be formed on a string. [3 marks]

Ans: A stationary wave is formed when two waves travel in opposite directions [1] and have the same amplitude and frequency [1].
     The frequency of a stationary wave must be a multiple of the fundamental frequency. [1]

10*. A stationary wave is formed on a string. What will happen with the tension if it is varied such that a new stationary wave with fewer loops is formed? [3 marks]

Ans: -A new stationary wave with fewer loops is formed when the wavelength λ increases. [1]
     -By v = fλ, for constant f, v increases if λ increases
     -Therefore, the tension should increase so that the wave speed v increases

11. Explain how a stationary wave is formed. [4 marks]

Ans: -The incident wave produced by the vibrator is reflected at the fixed end [1] 
     -The reflected wave and the incident wave travel at the same speed in opposite directions [1]
     -q9 pts 2 & 3 [1+1]

12. What is the purpose of lining the ripple tank with sponge?

Ans: To reduce the reflection of water waves [1] by absorbing energy from the wave. [1]

13. How do breakwaters prevent big waves from approaching the shore? 

Ans: When the water waves passes the first breakwater, diffraction occurs. The diffracted waves can be blocked by the second breakwater.

14. You are given a rectangular tray filled with water, a ruler, and a stopwatch. 
   a) Describe how you would use the above apparatus to find the speed of a pulse travelling in the tray of water. [4 marks]
   b) Suggest one possible error due to reaction time. [1 mark]
   c) Which tray, the one with deeper water of the one with shallower water, will have a smaller percentage error when finding the speed of the pulse travelling in it? [3 marks]

Other tips/misconceptions/common mistakes:
1. The maximum amplitude of a particle in a stationary wave cannot be determined with one figure (need to refer to graph).

Chapter 6 -- Wave Nature of Light and Electromagnetic Waves

1. Consider Young's double slit experiment. 
   a) What are the features of intereference pattern produced?

   b) Why can't it be done by replacing the double slit with two light sources?
    Ans: Light waves from two light sources are not coherent and the interference pattern is not observable.

   ci) How can an interference pattern be produced?
    Ans: The slit width must be COMPARABLE to the wavelength. The two slits cannot be too far apart. (e.g. slit width of 0.1mm is acceptable, but not 1mm)

   cii**) Alternative minima and maxima can be detected along the screen only if the slits are very narrow. Explain briefly. [2 marks]
    Ans: Only narrow slits allow light waves to diffract enough [1] so that the diffracted waves can overlap. [1]

   d) Under what conditions can the pattern be observed?
    Ans: When the light waves passing through the two slits are coherent and have similar amplitudes.

   e) What changes are there in the pattern if the monochromatic light source is replaced by white light? [3 marks]
    Ans: The central bright fringe is white. [1]
         For other orders of maxima, colour spectra are formed. [1]
         For each spectrum, the inner edge is violet while the outer edge is red. [1]

   f) Recall the relevant formulas.

   g****) Someone claims that more fringes can be captured on the screen if the screen is moved towards the double slit. Explain whether this claim is correct. [2 marks]
    Ans: Correct: Bright fringes of larger angular separations from the central bright fringe can be projected on the screen if the screen is closer to the double slit.
         Incorrect: The pattern formed by a double slit is very narrow. Moving the screen towards the slit will not increase the number of fringes captured.

   h) Explain the changes of fringe pattern when the setup is put in water. [3 marks]
    Ans: Light travels slower in water. By v = fλ, the wavelength of light in water is shorter than that in air. Therefore, fringes formed on the screen will be more closely spaced.
   
   i) Explain how the pattern is formed. [3 marks]
    Ans: -The light waves diffract when they pass through the two slits
         -Diffracted waves from the two slits interfere and form the pattern
         -The points of constructive interference correspond to bright fringes, while the points of desturctive interference correspond to dark fringes.
          
2. What factors affect the interference pattern for a) double slit b) diffraction grating?

3. When calculating the wavelength using the double slit formula, what assumption is made? (small angle approximation)

4. Consider an experiment where a monochromatic light source is directed at a diffraction grating along a metre rule.
   a) What are the features of intereference pattern produced?

   b) Under what condition can the angle of diffraction be calculated accurately? / How can we improve the accuracy of the experiment?
    Ans: When the grating-screen distance is much larger than the grating spacing. / Move the screen further away from the grating to increase the grating-screen distance.

   c) Given grating spacing and wavelength, find the maximum total number of bright fringes formed.

   d) State two applications of interference in daily-life. (Gauze curtain, colourful butterfly wings, DVD)

   e) The illuminated slit may not be well aligned along the metre rule. Suggest one way to reduce this error. (from DSE 2014 paper 1B q7) [2 marks]
    Ans: Repeat the procedures with the pin on the other side of the observer. [1] Take the average value of y obtained from both sides to calculate λ.

5. Describe two ways to estimate the wavelength of a laser light with i) double slit ii) diffraction grating. 
   iii) Suggest and explain one precaution that can make the results more accurate. iv) Compare the accuracy of two methods. [12 marks]

   i) -Direct the laser beam perpendicularly to the double slit to project an interference pattern on the screen
      -Measure the distance D between the double slit and the screen
      -Measure the distance y between the zeroth-order and the nth-order bright fringes
      -Calculate the wavelength of laser light λ by Δy = y/n and Δy = λD/a

   ii) -Direct the laser beam perpendicularly to the grating to project an interference pattern on the screen
       -Measure the distance D between the grating and the screen
       -Measure the distance y between the zeroth-order and the nth-order bright fringes
       -Calculate the angle of diffraction x by tan(x) = y/D, then calculate the wavelength of light λ by dsinx = nλ

   iii) Using higher-order bright fringe rather than the first-order bright fringe when measuring y. This reduces the percentage error in y.

   iv) Diffraction grating, because the interference pattern formed by it is larger than that of double slit, resulting in a more accurate measurement of fringe separation.

6. Compare double slit and grating regarding the following aspects and explain briefly.
   a) Brightness of pattern: grating allows more light to pass through than a double slit, fringes are brighter
   b) Span of pattern: Slit separation is much smaller than grating spacing. By comparing the two formulas, the value of θ is much larger for a grating
   c) Angle of diffraction √ for nth-order bright fringe
   d) Fringe separation: evenly spaced vs larger fringes further from centre
   e) Distance between nth-order and 0th-order bright fringes
   f) Highest order of bright fringe

7a. Why are radio waves more commonly used in telecommunications than microwaves even though microwaves can carry more information?

Ans: Radio waves have a longer wavelength and can diffract more around objects for signal transmission.

7b. Why are microwaves used in satellite telecommunications but not radio waves?

Ans: Radio waves have lower frequency and hence greater diffraction effect. They by-pass small obstacles and are not to be reflected from them.

8. State the a) properties and b) applications of EM waves.

9. State the mathematical relationship between wave speed, wave length, sinθ and refractive index for a fixed frequency.

10. Explain why the reception of signals is affected when a large cargo ship passes near the source of signal transmission.

Ans: The radio waves reflected by the cargo ship interfere with the waves coming directly from the source, so reception is affected.

11. Refer to DSE practice on p.136. 
   a) As the receivers moves from P to Q, the loudspeaker produces loud and soft sounds alternately. Explain briefly.
    Ans: -The path difference of the diffracted waves from X and Y to the receiver varies along PQ
         -Minima are recorded where destructive interference occurs, so soft sounds are produced. Maxima are recorded where constructive interference occurs, so loud sounds are produced

   b) What is the restriction on the widths of the slits in this experiment?
    Ans: They should be COMPARABLE to the wavelength of the microwaves.

   c) Someone expects the loudspeaker to produce a loud sound when the receiver is at P. However it does not. Explain briefly why this problem exists and suggest a method to fix it.
    Ans: -The DISTANCE OF THE TRANSMITTERS FROM X and Y are different, so the MICROWAVES COMING OUT from the two slits may not be IN PHASE. 
         -The problem can be fixed by locating the transmitter at EQUAL DISTANCE FROM X and Y

12***) Consider a transmitter emitting microwaves towards a convex paraffin lens. The loudspeaker will produce a louder sounds if the pointer detector detects a stronger microwave signal.
       Explain why the loudest sound is produced at a particular position.

    Ans: The microwaves are converged by the convex paraffin lens. (superposition)

13. Determine if X is double slit or a grating based on a picture of the interference pattern. (tip: answer according to the comparable + observable features in q6, e.g. span)

Example Ans: Grating. SPAN OF PATTERN produced by a double slit would be much narrower.

14. State some precautions taken in double slit/grating experiment to produce an observable pattern.

15. DSE 2015 paper 1B q5
    b: State and explain your observation when two small LEDs with same wavelength separated by 6mm are directed onto a screen.
     Ans: The screen is uniformly illuminated. [1] The light from the LEDs is incoherent. [1]

    dii: Why does the value obtained by calculation differ with the measurement in circular water waves?
     Ans: Screen has to be far away from slits (D >> a). [1] Small angle approximation cannot be applied. [1]

Ans: -Slit separation should be very small
     -Laboratory should be blacked out
     -Slits shd be as narrow as possible
     -Screen should be placed at a suitable distance of around 1-2m
     -If a filament lamp is used as the light source, make sure that the filament is parallel to the slits

Other tips/misconceptions/common mistakes:
1. Only diffraction and interference serve as evidence for the wave nature of light.
2. Recite the EM spectrum briefly.
3. How to find maximum number of bright fringes observed in double slit experiment, given a) wavelength, b) slit separation, c) sinθ
   (Original question: p.146 q29) (If observations can be carried out up to an angle of 2° on both sides of the central maximum)
   --> remember a sinθ => nλ    

Chapter 7 -- Sound

1. Find the amplitude, wavelength, period, frequency, wave speed according to the position of particles.

2. Find the possible frequencies of the wave. (Hint: In a certain period, the wave may have travelled nλ)

3. When do particles move at the highest speed? Where are they momentarily at rest?

4. For particles located in the centre of compression/rarefaction, which direction do they vibrate in when compared to the wave?

5. Determine if the following statement is true or not: A particle is momentarily at rest when it is furthest away from other particles.

6a) When a loudspeaker is put in front of the candle and produces sound, the smoke rises in a series of zigzags. Why?
6b) Demonstrate that sound waves are longitudinal. 

Ans: -Place the candle which has been lighted up in front of the loudspeaker. THe flame moves forward and backward.

Ans: Sound is a longitudinal wave. When the loudspeaker is turned on, its cone vibrates. Air particles in front of the cone are forced to vibrate to and fro.
     This produces a sound wave, which carries energy and travels outwards.

7. What type of wave is sound? How does the speed of sound vary in different media? Compare the wave properties of sound to light.

8. Consider an experiment measuring the speed of sound in air. Two microphones X and Y are connected to a timer and separated by distnace d.
  a) The value of d should not be too small. Explain. (Ans: Percentage eror in measuring d will be large if d is too small.)
  b*) The metal plate transmitting the sound waves should not touch the bench. Explain. 
     (Ans: Some sound waves will travel through the bench. Since sound travels much faster in bench than in air, the experimental results will be affected.)

9. Find the distance between A and B, given the time separation of the echo.

10. How can the following wave phenomena of sound be shown? a) Reflection b) Refraction c) Diffraction d) Interference
   a) Echoes b) Balloon filled with CO2 (sound travels slower in CO2 than in air) acting as a lens and focuses sound wave at a point.
   c) Setup with loudspeaker and a long paper tube. Sound can be heard at different positions in front of the tube.
   d) Place 2 smartphones 0.5m apart from each other on a table with tone generators. Alternate loud and soft sounds are detected across the area in front of the phones.

11. What is the audible frequency range? What does sound within this range imply? What is ultrasound and what are its applications? (Ans: Sonar system, ultrasound scanning)

12. Submarines typically emit ultrasound pulses for navigation. Why can't microwaves be used? (Ans: Microwaves are easily absorbed by water.)

13. Define the following terms: a) pitch b) loudness c) quality (Ans: a) frequency difference b) amplitude difference c) waveform difference.

14. The amplitude of the trace on the oscilloscope is not zero at positions of destructive interference. Why?

Ans: -There is background noise
     -Reflection of sound at the walls
     -Intensities of sound from 2 sources reaching the microphone may not be equal/sound waves from 2 sources have different amplitudes
     -Microphones has finite size/microphone is not a point receiver

15**. Given a loudspeaker unit with two speaker cones, a big one and a small one. The sound waves generated by the speaker cones will bend around the rim of the cones
    in a way similar to water waves bending around corners of obstacles. Which cone is more suitable for emitting high-frequency sounds? Why?

Ans: Smaller cone. Since the wavelength of high frequency sounds is shorter, diffraction is less. Smaller cone can be used to increase its degree of diffraction.

16. A device that emits ultrasonic pulses is used to monitor the thickness of the wall of a metal pipe. The results are shown in a graph that displays the transmitted and reflected pulses.
  a) Determine which pulse is the reflected pulse. (Ans: Reflected pulse has a smaller amplitude.) 
  b**) Given another similar graph but with 3 pulses. Someone points out that there may be a small crack in the wall of the pipe. Explain how this conclusion is made.
     Ans: Between the transmitted pulse and the pulse reflected from the wall, there is another pulse of smaller amplitude, which should be reflected from the crack.

17. Given a signal generator and 2 identical loudspeakers, design an experiment to show the interference of sound waves.

Ans: -Connect the signal generator to the 2 loudspeakers
     -Adjust the frequency of signal generator to give a sound note that can be heard
     -Walking in front of the loudspeakers, alternate loud and soft sound can be heard

18. A metal string is stretched over two wedges. It is plucked and a sound is heard.
 a) Describe how sound is produced by the string.
   Ans: When the string vibrates up and down, the air nearby will be forced to move, and the sound wave travels outwards.
 b) State one difference in the nature of the wave on the string and the sound wave produced.
   Ans: Both need material medium for propagation./Both are mechanical waves.

19. Is it possible for ultrasound to undergo total internal reflection when it travels from sea water to air?

Ans: No. Ultrasounds refracts towards the normal since ultrasound travels faster in water than in air.

Other tips/misconceptions/common mistakes:
1. Unlike particles vibrating in phase, particles vibrating in antiphase are not necessarily at a fixed distance of (n+1/2)λ from each other.
2**. For a s-d graph, if the curve goes to +ve to -ve through the axis, the intercept corresponds to a centre of compression (and vice versa).
3. 0dB is the threshold of hearing, which is the LOWEST SOUND INTENSITY that can be heard by the human ear. (not 'no sound')
4. Briefly memorise the sound intensity levels of different activities. (e.g. normal talking = 60dB)