Chapter 1 -- Electrostatics

1. What is the law of conservation of charge? What is the SI unit of charge?

2. What is the difference between electrical conductors and insulators, and how are they attracted to charged objects? What is this process called?

Ans: -A electrical conductor is an object with free electrons. Free electrons are pulled towards a charged object.
     -A electrical insulator is an object in which all electrons are tightly bounded to the nuclei. ELectrons WITHIN EACH MOLECULE are pulled towards the obejct.
     -Electrostatic induction

3a) Explain why a plastic rod becomes negatively charged after it is rubbed by the cloth.
 Ans: Some electrons are transferred from the cloth to the palstic bag.

3b*) Describe and explain the net electrostatic direction of the net electrostatic force acting on paper bits by the plastic rod. [COMMON]
 Ans: On the can, positive charges are induced at the end near the bag and negative charges at the end far from the bag.
      The attraction on the near end is greater than the repulsion on the far end. Therefore, the net electrostatic force acts towards the bag.

3c) If the rubbed plastic rod is replaced by a rubbed metal rod, are there any changes to the result? 
 Ans: The metal rod will attract paper bits, because it is discharged by earthing through the hand. 
      (Whenever the rod is charged, the charges are immediately shared with the Earth via the human body)

4. What is charging and discharging? Name some examples of charging and discharging. For these examples, are they applicable to conductors, insulators, or both?

Ans: -Charging: neutral object becomes electrically charged; Discharging: electrically charged object becomes neutral
     -Charging by friction: applies to insulators and insulated conductors
     -Charging by sharing: applies only to conductors
     -Discharging by earthing: applies only to conductors
     -Charging by induction: applies only to conductors

5. Refer to a flying aluminium foil experiment (p.12).
 a) Explain why the metal tray becomes charged after it is touched momentarily in step 3. (Ans: charging by induction and earthing)
 b) Explain why the foil 'flies' in the air after it is released and touches the tray in step 4. (Ans: share like charges -> repulsion)

6a) What is a gold leaf electroscope. (Ans: An instrument to test the presence of electric charges.)
6b) What is a Van de Graaff generator? [EXTRA] (Ans: A Van de Graaff generator pulls electrons from the Earth, moves them along a belt and stores them on the large sphere.)

7. A girl stands on a plastic stool and puts her hands on a metal dome. After a large amount of charges are transferred to the dome, the girl's hair stands on end. Explain.

Ans: The girl's hair carry the same kind of charges and repel each other.

Other tips/misconceptions/common mistakes:
1. Always point out which method of charging is involved in short questions (e.g. sharing, induction).\
2. For attraction problems between neutral and charged objects, always consider what will happen after the 2 objects touch each other 
   (e.g. attraction -> sharing -> repulsion)